# User guide to Deviate OS

## Boot Deviate in Simics

1. Open the makefile in the root folder with your favorite editor.
2. Change the variable SIMICS on line 2 to your simics workspace directory. Save the changes.
3. Open terminal go to the root project.
4. Type "make run" to run the precompiled operating system.
5. Press C in the simics prompt followed by enter.
6. The operating system is now running. You can use the shell commands below in the serial console to test the operating system.

## User's guide for programs

###Shell
The shell is the input handler for the OS.

__Shell command:__ shell
- Starts a command shell prompt.

__Shell command:__ ls
- Lists the programs available.

__Shell command:__ top
- Shows information about the current processes.

__Shell command:__ kill n
- Kills a process with pid n.

__Shell command:__ priority n x
- Changes the priority of a process with pid n to x.

###Increment
Prints integers 1 to n, where n is the argument.

__Shell command:__ incr n

###Fibonacci
List the n first fibonacci numbers, where n is the argument.

__Shell command:__ fib n

###Scroller Message
Sets the message of the malta scroller. First argument is the message.

__Shell command:__ scrollmsg Hello_World!

###Ring
Starts a program ring with n processes, where n is the first argument. The
second arguments is the message to pass around the ring.

__Shell command:__ ring n message

###Dining philosophers
Starts a dinner of five. Each philosopher will eat 10 times before leaving the table.

__Shell command:__ dp

###Supervision demo
Starts a supervision demonstration.

__Shell command:__ superd
